.TH "ssu-merge" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
ssu-merge - merge SSU rRNA alignments created by parallel ssu-align jobs

.SH SYNOPSIS

.TP
Merge results from parallel ssu-align jobs:
.B ssu-merge
.I [options]
.I output-dir-created-by-ssu-prep

.TP
Merge a list of alignments, all created with the same CM:
.B ssu-merge --list
.I [options]
.I list-file
.I output-alignment

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
.B ssu-merge 
merges results from parallel
.B ssu-align 
jobs. The 
.B ssu-align 
jobs must have been executed by a shell script created by
.B ssu-prep.
Alternatively if
.B --list
is used, 
.B ssu-merge
merges all alignments in 
.I list-file
into a single alignment, outputs it as 
.I output-alignment
and exits.

When 
.B --list
is not used,
.B ssu-merge
first 
examines the directory
.I output-dir-created-by-ssu-prep
to make sure that (a) it was created by 
.B ssu-prep 
and (b) all of the parallel 
.B ssu-align 
jobs created by 
.B ssu-prep 
have successfully finished running. If both (a) and (b) are true, 
.B ssu-merge
merges the output files from all of the jobs together, removing the
individual job output files once it has successfully finished.

Users should rarely need to call
.B ssu-merge
directly. This is because it is called internally by the final 
.B ssu-align 
job in a set of parallel jobs created by 
.B ssu-prep
to automatically merge the output of all the jobs once they are all
complete.  However, if the 
.B --no-merge
option was specified to 
.B ssu-prep,
or one of the jobs failed to finish successfully, it will be necessary
for the user to directly execute 
.B ssu-merge.

For example, given the original 
.B ssu-prep 
command:

.B ssu-prep -x my.fa foo 8 

Followed by the execution of the resulting output shell script:

.B sh foo.ssu-align.sh

The 8th and final job submitted by this shell script will
wait for all jobs to finish and automatically merge the results of all
the jobs by calling
.B ssu-merge.
However, if an error occurs preventing one or more of the jobs from
successfully finishing, the final job will output an error
message informing the user what jobs have failed and how to rerun
them.

Once they have been rerun, the user will need to manually merge the
output of all the jobs with the command:

.B ssu-merge foo

.PP
If the
.B --list
option is used, 
.B ssu-merge
expects two command-line arguments. The first (
.I list-file
) is the name of a file
that lists all input alignment files to merge. The second (
.I output-alignment
) is the desired name
for the merged output alignment.  All input alignments must be in
Stockholm format, include #=GC RF 'reference' annotation, and have the
same number of nongap RF positions. In this mode,
.B ssu-merge
will simply merge all the input alignments in all the files into a single
merged alignment, save it to
.I output-alignment
and exit. 

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options.

.TP
.B -f
Allow output files that already exist to be overwritten.
This option should only be needed if 
.B ssu-merge
has already been executed on 
.I <output-dir-created-by-ssu-prep>.

.TP
.B --rfonly
When merging alignments, discard insert columns and only include
consensus columns in the alignment. The alignments will be a fixed,
predicted width (the number of consensus positions for each model),
but will not include all target nucleotides. Note that insert columns
are automatically removed by the 
.B ssu-mask 
program which is recommended prior to inputting alignments into
phylogenetic inference programs and using 
.B --rfonly
can greatly reduce the size of the final merged alignments,
especially for very deep alignments (hundreds of thousands of
sequences). The
.B --rfonly 
option can also be specified to
.B ssu-prep,
in which case it will be set by the internal merge performed by the
resulting final
.B ssu-align
job. 

.TP 
.B -i
Input alignments are interleaved Stockholm format in which each
sequence is split up across several lines, as opposed to so-called
Pfam Stockholm format in which each sequence occurs on exactly one
line. Alignments created by
.B ssu-align
are by default in Pfam Stockholm format, but will be interleaved
Stockholm if the
.B -i
option was supplied to
.B ssu-align.
This option only works in combination with
.B --list.

.TP 
.B --dna
Output the merged alignment as DNA, not as RNA. By default, the output
alignment will be RNA, even if the input alignments were DNA. 
This option only works in combination with
.B --list.


.SH SEE ALSO 

See 
.B ssu-align-package(1)
for a master man page with a list of all the individual man pages
for programs in the SSU-ALIGN package.

.PP
For complete documentation, see the user guide that came with your
SSU-ALIGN distribution (Userguide.pdf); or see the SSU-ALIGN web page
(@SSUALIGN_URL@).

.SH COPYRIGHT

.nf
@SSUALIGN_COPYRIGHT@
@SSUALIGN_LICENSE@
.fi

For additional information on copyright and licensing, see the file
called COPYRIGHT in your SSU-ALIGN source distribution, or see the SSU-ALIGN
web page 
(@SSUALIGN_URL@).


.SH AUTHOR

.nf
Eric Nawrocki
Eddy/Rivas Laboratory
Janelia Farm Research Campus
19700 Helix Drive
Ashburn VA 20147 USA
http://eddylab.org
.fi

