.TH "ssu-build" 1 "@RELEASEDATE@" "@PACKAGE@ @RELEASE@" "@PACKAGE@ Manual"

.SH NAME
.TP 
ssu-build - build small subunit ribosomal RNA (16s/18s SSU rRNA) covariance models

.SH SYNOPSIS

.TP
Build models using a user-created Stockholm alignment:
.B ssu-build
.I [options]
.I alignment-file

.TP
Build models using default SSU-ALIGN seed alignment:
.B ssu-build -d 
.I [options]
.I seed-name

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
.B ssu-build
reads a multiple alignment of SSU rRNA sequences from 
.I alignment-file,
constructs a covariance model and saves the CM 
to a file. 
.PP
The alignment file must be in Stockholm format, and
must contain consensus secondary structure annotation.

.PP 
Alternatively, with the 
.B -d 
option, 
.B ssu-build 
uses the default SSU-ALIGN seed alignment for family
.I seed-name 
as the input alignment. Possible choices for
.I seed-name 
are 
.I archaea, 
.I bacteria 
and
.I eukarya.
The 
.B -d
option is expected to mainly be useful in combination
with the
.BI --trunc " <s>"
option, which specifies that a subset of the input alignment be used
to construct a non-full length model of a SSU rRNA, such as within
positions spanned by a specific set of primers designed to target a
variable region. (See the description of the
.BI --trunc " <s>"
option below for details on its usage.)

.PP
When the
.B -d 
option is used in combination with the
.BI --trunc " <s>"
option, 
.B ssu-build
will create secondary structure diagrams that highlight the specific
SSU rRNA region that the newly constructed model represents.

.PP
The 
.BI --trunc " <s>"
option requires the user to know the beginning and ending 
.I consensus
position of the desired region. Running
.B ssu-build
with the 
.I --num 
option will cause it to reformat the input alignment such that its
consensus columns are numbered to make it easier to determine the
appropriate column range. Additionally, if 
.I -d 
is being used to use one of the default seed alignments, the 
secondary structure diagrams of the default seed models included in the 
User's Guide have consensus positions numbered.


.PP
.B ssu-build
uses the program 
.B cmbuild 
from the 
.B INFERNAL
package to construct CMs. Interested and motivated users can use
.B cmbuild
directly to create models. The version installed with 
.B SSU-ALIGN
is actually called 
.B ssu-cmbuild
to distinguish it from any versions of the program distributed 
with 
.B INFERNAL
on your system.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B -h
Print brief help; includes version number and summary of
all options.

.TP
.B -d
Specify that the command-line argument is the name of a SSU-ALIGN 0.1
seed alignment, either 'archaea', 'bacteria', or 'eukarya'.

.TP
.B -f
Allow overwriting of the CM file. 

.TP
.BI -o " <s>"
Specify that the CM file be named 
.I <s>.
Without this option,
.B ssu-build
will automatically name the CM file based on the input alignment file
name and command-line options that are used.

.TP
.BI -n " <s>"
Specify that the CM itself be named 
.I <s>.
Without this option,
.B ssu-build
will automatically name the CM based on the input alignment file
name and command-line options that are used. The name of the CM is
important because it will be included as part of all output file names
for files created by other SSU-ALIGN scripts that use this CM.

.TP
.BI --append " <s>"
Append this CM to CM file 
.I <s>
that already exists. This allows creation of multi-CM files that can
be used for discriminating between SSU sequences from different
phylogenetic clades, such as the default SSU-ALIGN 0.1 CM file, which
contains 3 CMs, one for each of the three domains of life.

.TP
.BI --key-out " <s>"
Include the string 
.I <s>
as part of all output file names from
.B ssu-build,
immediately before the suffix. For example, foo.<s>.cm would be
created instead of foo.cm.

.TP
.BI --trunc " <s>"
Specify the range of alignment consensus columns to use for building
the model. 
Without this option, the full alignment will be used. The
.I <s>
string must not contain any whitespace and must be formatted as
.I <start>-<end>
where <start> is the first consensus position to include and <end> is
the final one, separated by a single '-' character.
This option can be useful for creating a model that matches
a specific region of the SSU molecule. For example, running
.B ssu-build -d --trunc " 525-765 archaea"
will build a CM that matches the so-called hypervariable V4 region of
the archaeal SSU molecule.
See the 
.B --num
option for how to create alignments with consensus columns numbered to
facilitate choosing start and end positions.

.TP
.BI --num
Do not build a CM. Instead, create a new alignment that is identical
to the input alignment (or default seed alignment if
.B -d) 
but that has extra annotation numbering consensus positions. This
option is meant to be helpful for determining start and end positions
to use with the
.B --trunc
option. 

.TP
.B -i
Output alignments in interleaved Stockholm format of a fixed width
that may be more convenient for reading. Without this option,
output alignments will contain one line per sequence, and thus may
contain very long lines. 

.TP
.B --rf
Use reference coordinate annotation (#=GC RF line in the input
Stockholm alignment) to determine which columns in the input alignment
are consensus, and
which are not. Any non-gap character indicates a consensus
column. (For example, mark consensus columns with "x", and insert
columns with "."). This is true by default if the 
.B -d
option is used, in which case 
.B ssu-build
will use the #=GC RF annotation in the default seed model. 
However, if 
.B -d
is not used, the default is to determine which columns are consensus
automatically; if the frequency of gap characters in a column is
greater than a threshold, gapthresh (default 0.8, but controllable
with the 
.B --gapthresh 
option), the column is not consensus.

.TP
.BI --gapthresh " <x>"
Determine which columns in the input alignment are consensus based on
the frequency of gap characters in each column. If less than or equal
to 
.I <x>
then the column is defined as a consensus one. As discussed in the
description of the 
.B --rf
option, this is default unless the 
.B -d
and/or
.B --rf
options are enabled, with an
.I <x>
of 0.8. 

.TP
.BI --ps2pdf " <s>"
Specify that an executable named 
.I <s>
in your PATH can be used for converting postscript files to pdf files
with the usage: 
.BI <s> " foo.ps foo.pdf"
This executable will be used for creating a pdf diagram of the
showing the location of a truncated model on the SSU molecule if the 
.B --trunc 
and 
.B -d 
options are used.
By default, 
.B ssu-build
will use the executable program named 
.B ps2pdf 
if it is in your PATH to do this conversion. If 
.B ps2pdf 
does not exist, a postscript file will be generated.

.TP
.B --ps-only
Specify that postscript output is preferable to pdf. 
No postscript to pdf conversion will be attempted.

.SH EXPERT OPTIONS

.TP
.B --eent
Use the entropy weighting strategy to determine the effective sequence
number that gives a target mean match state relative entropy. 
The default target mean match state relative entropy is 0.59 bits but can be
changed to 
.I <x> 
with 
.BI --ere " <x>".

.TP 
.BI --ere " <x>"
Set the target mean match state relative entropy as 
.I <x>.
By default the target relative entropy per match position is 0.59 bits.


.SH SEE ALSO 

See 
.B ssu-align-package(1)
for a master man page with a list of all the individual man pages
for programs in the SSU-ALIGN package.

.PP
For complete documentation, see the user guide that came with your
SSU-ALIGN distribution (Userguide.pdf); or see the SSU-ALIGN web page
(@SSUALIGN_URL@).

.SH COPYRIGHT

.nf
@HMMER_COPYRIGHT@
@HMMER_LICENSE@
.fi

For additional information on copyright and licensing, see the file
called COPYRIGHT in your SSU-ALIGN source distribution, or see the SSU-ALIGN
web page 
(@SSUALIGN_URL@).


.SH AUTHOR

.nf
Eddy/Rivas Laboratory
Janelia Farm Research Campus
19700 Helix Drive
Ashburn VA 20147 USA
http://eddylab.org
.fi
